PRACTICAL 2
CREATE AND CONFIGURE VM INSTANCES ON GOOGLE CLOUD PLATFORM
Practical objective:
In this practical, you will create, configure, connect to, inspect, stop, start,
and delete a virtual machine instance on Google Cloud Platform using Compute
Engine.
Cloud platform used:
Google Cloud Platform, also called GCP.
Main service used:
Compute Engine.
Estimated outcome:
By the end of this practical, you will be able to:
- Enable or open Compute Engine in Google Cloud Console.
- Create a VM instance with basic configuration.
- Understand machine type, region, zone, boot disk, firewall, labels, and service
account options.
- Connect to a VM using SSH.
- Run basic Linux commands inside a VM.
- Stop and start a VM.
- Delete a VM to avoid unnecessary cost.
- Review the VM configuration using current Google Cloud best practices.
Important safety message:
Virtual machines can create cloud charges while they are running, and disks can
also create charges even when a VM is stopped. Delete test resources after the
practical unless your teacher instructs you to keep them.
1. BASIC THEORY BEFORE STARTING
1.1 What is a virtual machine?
A virtual machine, or VM, is a software-based computer that runs on physical
hardware managed by a cloud provider.
A VM has:
- CPU
- Memory
- Operating system
- Disk
- Network interface
- IP address
1.2 What is Google Compute Engine?
Google Compute Engine is the Google Cloud service used to create and manage
virtual machines.
Compute Engine provides:
- VM instances
- Machine types
- Persistent disks
- Images
- Snapshots

- Instance groups
- Load balancing support
- Firewall integration
Compute Engine is an example of Infrastructure as a Service because it gives you
control over virtual machines, operating systems, disks, and networking.
1.3 What is a machine type?
A machine type defines the amount of virtual CPU and memory assigned to a VM.
Examples:
- e2-micro
- e2-small
- e2-medium
- n2-standard-2
Choose a small machine type for lab work. Bigger machines cost more and are
usually not needed for basic practicals.
1.4 What is a region and zone?
A region is a geographic location.
Example:
- us-central1
- asia-south1
- europe-west1
A zone is a location inside a region.
Example:
- us-central1-a
- us-central1-b
- asia-south1-a
Regions and zones decide where your VM physically runs. Choose a nearby region
when possible to reduce latency, but follow your teacher's instructions for lab
consistency.
1.5 What is a boot disk?
A boot disk contains the operating system and files required to start the VM.
Examples of operating system images:
- Debian
- Ubuntu
- CentOS Stream
- Rocky Linux
- Windows Server
The boot disk is like the hard disk of a computer where the operating system is
installed.
1.6 What is a firewall rule?
A firewall rule controls network traffic allowed to or from a VM.
Examples:

- Allow SSH on port 22.
- Allow HTTP on port 80.
- Allow HTTPS on port 443.
Firewall rules are security gates. Do not open ports to the whole internet
unless you understand why it is needed.
1.7 What is SSH?
SSH stands for Secure Shell. It is used to connect securely to a Linux VM and run
commands remotely.
SSH lets you operate a cloud VM from your browser or terminal, similar to using a
keyboard and screen attached to a remote computer.
1.8 What is OS Login?
OS Login is a Google Cloud feature that manages Linux VM SSH access using IAM
permissions instead of manually managing SSH keys in metadata.
OS Login is a modern and recommended way to manage SSH access because access can
be controlled through IAM and revoked when a user no longer has permission.
1.9 What is Shielded VM?
Shielded VM provides security features that help protect VMs from rootkits and
boot-level malware.
Shielded VM features include:
- Secure Boot
- Virtual Trusted Platform Module, or vTPM
- Integrity monitoring
Shielded VM is like extra startup protection for your virtual machine. Keep these
features enabled unless there is a special reason to change them.
2. REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Hardware requirements
- Computer or laptop
- Internet connection
2.2 Software requirements
- Web browser
2.3 Cloud requirements
- Google Cloud account
- Google Cloud project
- Billing enabled if required for Compute Engine
- Permission to create VM instances
Required IAM permission concept:
To create VM instances, a user commonly needs a role such as Compute Instance
Admin or suitable custom permissions assigned by the administrator.

If you cannot create a VM, it may be because billing is disabled or your account
does not have enough permissions.
3. STEP-BY-STEP PRACTICAL
STEP 1: Open Google Cloud Console
Open:
https://console.cloud.google.com
Sign in with your Google Cloud account.
Use the same account and project assigned for your practical work. Using a wrong
account may hide your project or create resources in the wrong place.
Expected result:
Google Cloud Console opens successfully.
STEP 2: Select the correct project
Use the project selector at the top of the console and choose the project for
this practical.
Every VM belongs to a project. Always confirm the project before creating cloud
resources.
Expected result:
The correct project name is visible in the top navigation bar.
STEP 3: Open Compute Engine
In the search bar, type:
Compute Engine
Open Compute Engine.
Compute Engine is the service where VM instances are created and managed.
Expected result:
The Compute Engine page opens.
STEP 4: Enable Compute Engine API if asked
If Google Cloud asks you to enable the Compute Engine API, click:
Enable
Wait for the service to initialize.
Google Cloud services use APIs. A service must be enabled in the project before
you can create resources from that service.
Expected result:

Compute Engine becomes available for the project.
STEP 5: Open VM instances page
In Compute Engine, click:
VM instances
The VM instances page lists all virtual machines created in the selected project.
Expected result:
The VM instances list page opens.
STEP 6: Click Create Instance
Click:
Create Instance
This starts the VM creation form. You will select the VM name, location, machine
type, operating system, disk, network, and security options.
Expected result:
The Create an instance page opens.
STEP 7: Enter VM name
Enter a VM name such as:
cloudnative-vm-1
Use lowercase letters, numbers, and hyphens.
Use a meaningful name so you can identify the VM later. Avoid spaces and special
characters.
Expected result:
The VM name is entered.
STEP 8: Select region and zone
Choose a region and zone as instructed by your teacher.
Example:
Region: us-central1
Zone: us-central1-a
For lab work, any available region may work, but choosing the same region for all
the class makes troubleshooting easier.
Expected result:
Region and zone are selected.

STEP 9: Select machine type
Choose a small machine type for lab work.
Example:
Series: E2
Machine type: e2-micro or e2-small
Small machine types are enough for learning Linux commands and basic web server
tests. Larger machine types cost more.
Expected result:
A suitable small machine type is selected.
STEP 10: Configure boot disk
Click the boot disk option and choose a Linux operating system.
Recommended beginner option:
Operating system: Debian
Version: Latest stable Debian version shown in the console
Boot disk type: Balanced persistent disk or default option
Size: 10 GB or default lab size
Debian is a common Linux distribution and works well for beginner cloud VM
practicals. Use default disk settings unless your teacher asks otherwise.
Expected result:
Boot disk is configured.
STEP 11: Review identity and API access
Find the section related to service account or identity.
For a basic lab, keep the default setting if your teacher allows it, or choose a
least-privilege service account if provided.
A VM service account controls what Google Cloud APIs the VM can access. In
production, avoid using overly powerful service accounts.
Best-practice note:
Use least privilege. Do not attach a highly privileged service account to a VM
unless required.
Expected result:
Service account setting is reviewed.
STEP 12: Add labels
Find the labels section and add labels such as:
Key: purpose
Value: practical

Key: owner
Value: student
Labels help organize resources, filter them, and understand cost or ownership.
Using labels is a good cloud management habit.
Expected result:
Labels are added to the VM configuration.
STEP 13: Review firewall options
In the firewall section, you may see options such as:
- Allow HTTP traffic
- Allow HTTPS traffic
For this basic VM practical, leave them unchecked unless your teacher asks you to
install a web server.
Opening HTTP or HTTPS allows external traffic to reach your VM. Do not open ports
unless the practical requires it.
Expected result:
Firewall options are reviewed.
STEP 14: Review advanced security options
Look for security settings such as Shielded VM.
Keep Shielded VM protections enabled if they are available by default.
Shielded VM features provide extra protection during VM boot. Keeping them
enabled follows modern cloud security practice.
Expected result:
Security options are reviewed.
STEP 15: Create the VM
Review all settings, then click:
Create
After clicking Create, Google Cloud provisions the VM. Provisioning means cloud
resources such as CPU, memory, disk, and network are assigned to your instance.
Expected result:
The VM appears in the VM instances list.
STEP 16: Wait until VM is running
Wait until the VM status becomes:
Running
A VM needs some time to start, just like a physical computer needs time to boot.

Expected result:
The VM is running.
STEP 17: Observe VM details
In the VM instances list, observe:
- Name
- Zone
- Internal IP
- External IP, if assigned
- Status
Internal IP is used inside the cloud network. External IP is used to reach the VM
from the internet. For stronger security, production VMs often avoid public
external IPs and use controlled access methods.
Expected result:
Basic VM details are identified.
STEP 18: Connect to the VM using SSH
Click the SSH button next to the VM.
Wait for the browser-based SSH window to open.
Browser SSH is convenient for learning. In secure production environments,
organizations commonly use OS Login and restricted network access such as
Identity-Aware Proxy.
Expected result:
An SSH terminal opens.
STEP 19: Run hostname command
Inside the SSH terminal, run:
hostname
The hostname command shows the name of the machine you are connected to. It
confirms that your SSH session is inside the VM.
Expected result:
The VM hostname appears.
STEP 20: Check operating system information
Run:
cat /etc/os-release
Expected result:
Operating system details are displayed.

STEP 21: Check disk usage
Run:
df -h
Expected result:
Disk usage information appears.
STEP 22: Check memory usage
Run:
free -h
Expected result:
Memory usage information appears.
STEP 23: Check CPU information
Run:
lscpu
Expected result:
CPU information appears.
STEP 24: Update package information
For Debian or Ubuntu, run:
sudo apt update
Expected result:
Package information is updated.
STEP 25: Optional web server test
Only if your teacher asks you to test HTTP traffic, install Nginx:
sudo apt install -y nginx
Then check status:
systemctl status nginx
Nginx is a web server. If HTTP firewall traffic is not allowed, the web server
may run inside the VM but not be reachable from the public internet.
Expected result:

Nginx is installed and running if this optional step is performed.
STEP 26: Exit SSH session
Run:
exit
The exit command closes the SSH session and returns you to the console.
Expected result:
SSH session is closed.
STEP 27: Stop the VM
In the VM instances page, select the VM and click:
Stop
Confirm if asked.
Stopping a VM stops CPU and memory charges, but persistent disk and reserved IP
charges may still apply. Delete resources if the practical is complete.
Expected result:
VM status changes to stopped or terminated.
STEP 28: Start the VM again
Select the stopped VM and click:
Start / Resume
Starting a VM boots it again. A stopped VM can be restarted later if the disk is
kept.
Expected result:
VM returns to running status.
STEP 29: Delete the VM after practical
After completing observations, select the VM and click:
Delete
Confirm deletion.
Deleting test VMs prevents unnecessary charges. Always clean up resources after
cloud practicals unless your teacher asks you to keep them.
Expected result:
The VM is deleted from the VM instances list.
