PRACTICAL 4
CREATE USERS, ROLES, AND PERMISSIONS
Practical objective:
In this practical, you will understand Google Cloud Identity and Access Management,
add a principal to a project, assign a limited role, verify access, create a
service account, understand custom roles, and remove access after the practical.
Cloud platform used:
Google Cloud Platform, also called GCP.
Main service used:
Identity and Access Management, also called IAM.
Estimated outcome:
By the end of this practical, you will be able to:
- Open IAM in Google Cloud Console.
- Understand principals, roles, permissions, and allow policies.
- Add a user, group, or service account as a principal.
- Grant a predefined role using least privilege.
- Review assigned permissions.
- Create a service account for application identity.
- Understand basic, predefined, and custom roles.
- Remove temporary access after the practical.
- Review IAM configuration using current Google Cloud best practices.
Important safety message:
IAM controls access to cloud resources. Wrong IAM permissions can expose data,
allow resource deletion, or create unexpected cost. For this practical, grant
only limited test permissions and remove them after the lab.
1. BASIC THEORY BEFORE STARTING
1.1 What is IAM?
IAM stands for Identity and Access Management. It controls who can access Google
Cloud resources and what actions they can perform.
IAM answers:
- Who is requesting access?
- Which resource is being accessed?
- What action is requested?
- Is the action allowed?
IAM is like the security permission system of Google Cloud. It decides who can
view, create, modify, or delete resources.
1.2 What is a principal?
A principal is an identity that can be granted access.
Examples of principals:
- Google account user
- Google group
- Service account
- Cloud Identity domain
- Google Workspace domain

In older material, you may see the word "member." In current Google Cloud IAM,
the word "principal" is commonly used.
1.3 What is a user?
A user is a human identity, usually represented by an email address.
Example:
student@example.com
Important note:
In Google Cloud IAM, you usually do not create normal Gmail users directly from
IAM. You add existing users as principals or manage organization users through
Google Workspace or Cloud Identity.
For this practical, "create user access" means adding an existing email identity
to IAM with a specific role.
1.4 What is a role?
A role is a collection of permissions.
Example:
The Storage Object Viewer role contains permissions needed to view objects in
Cloud Storage.
You normally assign roles, not individual permissions, to users or service
accounts.
1.5 What is a permission?
A permission allows a specific action on a Google Cloud resource.
Examples:
- storage.objects.get
- compute.instances.create
- resourcemanager.projects.getIamPolicy
Permissions are very detailed. Roles group permissions together so access is
easier to manage.
1.6 What is an IAM allow policy?
An allow policy is attached to a resource such as a project, folder, or
organization. It contains role bindings.
A role binding connects:
- Principal
- Role
- Resource
- Optional condition
When you grant a role to a user on a project, you are adding a role binding to
the project's IAM allow policy.
1.7 Types of IAM roles
Basic roles:
- Owner

- Editor
- Viewer
Predefined roles:
- Google-managed roles for specific services.
- Example: Storage Object Viewer, Compute Viewer, Logs Viewer.
Custom roles:
- User-defined roles containing selected permissions.
For modern cloud security, avoid basic roles for normal work. Prefer predefined
roles, and use custom roles only when predefined roles are still too broad.
1.8 What is least privilege?
Least privilege means giving only the permissions required for a task and nothing
more.
Example:
If a user only needs to view storage objects, grant Storage Object Viewer instead
of Editor or Owner.
Least privilege reduces damage if an account is misused or compromised.
1.9 What is a service account?
A service account is a special identity used by applications, virtual machines,
or automated processes.
Example:
A VM uses a service account to read files from a storage bucket.
Human users should use user accounts. Applications and services should use
service accounts.
1.10 What is IAM condition?
An IAM condition restricts when a role binding applies.
Examples:
- Access expires after a date.
- Access applies only to a resource with a specific name.
Conditions are useful for temporary or limited access, but they should be used
carefully because incorrect conditions can block needed access.
2. REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Hardware requirements
- Computer or laptop
- Internet connection
2.2 Software requirements
- Web browser
- Optional: Cloud Shell for command-line method

2.3 Cloud requirements
- Google Cloud account
- Google Cloud project
- Permission to manage IAM on the project
- A test user email or Google group email provided by the teacher, if role
assignment is required
Required permission concept:
To manage access on a project, a user commonly needs a role such as Project IAM
Admin or suitable custom permissions assigned by an administrator.
If you cannot add or remove IAM access, your account probably does not have IAM
administration permission. Do not try to use another person's account.
3. STEP-BY-STEP PRACTICAL
STEP 1: Open Google Cloud Console
Open:
https://console.cloud.google.com
Sign in with your Google Cloud account.
Use your assigned lab account. IAM changes affect real access to cloud resources.
Expected result:
Google Cloud Console opens successfully.
STEP 2: Select the correct project
Use the project selector at the top of the console and select the project for
this practical.
IAM roles can be assigned at project level. Selecting the wrong project may give
access to the wrong resources.
Expected result:
The correct project is selected.
STEP 3: Open IAM and Admin
In the search bar, type:
IAM
Open:
IAM and Admin
IAM and Admin is where you view and manage access to the selected project.
Expected result:
IAM and Admin page opens.

STEP 4: Open the IAM page
In IAM and Admin, click:
IAM
The IAM page shows principals and their assigned roles on the selected project.
Expected result:
The IAM policy list is visible.
STEP 5: Observe existing principals
Look at the list of principals.
Observe:
- Principal name or email
- Principal type
- Assigned roles
- Inherited roles, if shown
Some roles may be inherited from folders or organizations. Inherited permissions
come from higher levels in the resource hierarchy.
Expected result:
Existing access entries are identified.
STEP 6: Identify basic roles
Look for any roles named:
- Owner
- Editor
- Viewer
Basic roles are very broad. They are sometimes used in small labs, but production
environments should prefer more specific predefined or custom roles.
Expected result:
You can identify whether basic roles exist in the project.
STEP 7: Plan the access to grant
For this practical, choose a limited predefined role.
Recommended lab role:
Storage Object Viewer
Purpose:
Allows viewing Cloud Storage objects without giving full project control.
Always decide the task first, then choose the smallest role that can perform that
task.
Expected result:

The role to grant is selected.
STEP 8: Add a principal
Click:
Grant Access
or
Add principal
Enter the test user email or group email provided by your teacher.
Example:
student-test@example.com
In a real organization, granting roles to groups is often better than granting
roles directly to individual users because group membership is easier to manage.
Expected result:
The principal email is entered.
STEP 9: Assign a predefined role
In the role field, search for:
Storage Object Viewer
Select:
Cloud Storage > Storage Object Viewer
This is a predefined role. Google manages predefined roles and updates them when
services change.
Expected result:
The Storage Object Viewer role is selected.
STEP 10: Avoid basic roles
Do not select Owner, Editor, or Viewer for this lab unless your teacher
explicitly instructs you.
Owner and Editor grant far more permissions than a beginner practical needs.
Using narrow roles follows least privilege.
Expected result:
No broad basic role is selected for the test principal.
STEP 11: Optional condition for temporary access
If your teacher wants temporary access, add an IAM condition.
Example condition idea:

Access expires after a specific date and time.
IAM conditions can reduce risk by making access temporary, but they must be
configured carefully.
Expected result:
Condition is added only if instructed.
STEP 12: Save the role binding
Click:
Save
Saving updates the project's IAM allow policy by adding the selected principal
and role.
Expected result:
The principal appears in the IAM list with the selected role.
STEP 13: Verify the assigned role
Search or filter the IAM list for the principal email.
Confirm that the assigned role is:
Storage Object Viewer
Always verify IAM changes. A wrong role can give too much access or not enough
access.
Expected result:
The correct role is visible for the principal.
STEP 14: Understand effective access
Check whether the principal has any other roles in the project or inherited from
higher levels.
A user's real access is the combination of all roles granted directly and
inherited from parent resources.
Expected result:
You understand that multiple role bindings can combine to create broader access.
STEP 15: Open Roles page
In IAM and Admin, open:
Roles
The Roles page shows basic, predefined, and custom roles available for the
project or organization.
Expected result:

The Roles page opens.
STEP 16: Search for a predefined role
Search for:
Storage Object Viewer
Open or view the role details.
Role details show the permissions included in the role. This helps you understand
what actions the role allows.
Expected result:
Permissions included in the predefined role are visible.
STEP 17: Observe permissions in the role
Read some permissions listed in the role.
Examples may include permissions related to reading storage objects and viewing
bucket information.
Permissions are the actual allowed actions. Roles are collections of those
permissions.
Expected result:
You can identify that the role contains multiple permissions.
STEP 18: Understand custom roles
On the Roles page, look for the option to create a custom role, but do not create
one unless your teacher instructs you.
Custom roles are useful when predefined roles are too broad, but they require
careful maintenance because permissions can change as services evolve.
Expected result:
You can identify where custom roles are managed.
STEP 19: Open Service Accounts
In IAM and Admin, open:
Service Accounts
Service accounts are identities for applications, VMs, and automation, not human
users.
Expected result:
The Service Accounts page opens.
STEP 20: Create a service account

Click:
Create service account
Enter:
Service account name:
cloudnative-practical-sa
Service account ID:
cloudnative-practical-sa
Description:
Service account for Practical 4 IAM lab
Use clear names for service accounts so their purpose is easy to understand
later.
Expected result:
Service account basic details are entered.
STEP 21: Grant limited role to service account
If asked to grant a role during creation, choose a limited role such as:
Storage Object Viewer
or skip role granting if your teacher wants only service account creation.
Do not give broad roles such as Editor to service accounts. Service accounts are
often used by programs, so over-permissioning them is risky.
Expected result:
The service account is created with limited or no project role, depending on
teacher instruction.
STEP 22: Avoid creating service account keys
Do not create or download a service account key file for this practical unless
your teacher specifically instructs you.
Long-lived service account keys are sensitive credentials. Modern practice is to
avoid keys when possible and use managed identity methods.
Expected result:
No unnecessary service account key is created.
STEP 23: Review service account details
Open the newly created service account and review:
- Email
- Description
- Permissions
- Keys tab
Service account email is used when attaching the service account to VMs,

applications, or workloads.
Expected result:
Service account information is reviewed.
STEP 24: Remove test user access
Go back to IAM page.
Find the test principal that was added.
Edit or remove the Storage Object Viewer role binding.
Temporary lab access should be removed after the practical. Keeping unnecessary
permissions violates least privilege.
Expected result:
The test principal no longer has the lab role.
STEP 25: Delete the service account
Go to Service Accounts.
Select:
cloudnative-practical-sa
Click:
Delete
Confirm deletion.
Delete test service accounts after practicals so unused identities do not remain
in the project.
Expected result:
The test service account is deleted.
STEP 26: Review IAM recommendations if available
Search for:
IAM Recommender
or check IAM recommendations in the console if available.
IAM Recommender can suggest removing or replacing overly broad roles based on
permission usage history.
Expected result:
You can identify where IAM recommendations may appear.
STEP 27: Review Policy Analyzer if available

Search for:
Policy Analyzer
Open it if available in your account.
Policy Analyzer helps answer questions such as who has what access to which
resources.
Expected result:
You can identify Policy Analyzer or understand its purpose.
STEP 28: Final access check
Return to IAM and confirm:
- Test user access was removed.
- Test service account was deleted.
- No broad role was granted accidentally.
Final IAM review is important because access mistakes can become security risks.
Expected result:
No unnecessary practical IAM access remains.
4. OPTIONAL COMMAND-LINE METHOD
This section is optional and should be used only if your teacher wants you to
practice Cloud Shell.
4.1 Open Cloud Shell
Open Cloud Shell from Google Cloud Console.
Cloud Shell includes the gcloud CLI, which can manage IAM policies and service
accounts.
4.2 Check active project
Run:
gcloud config get-value project
Always confirm the active project before changing IAM.
4.3 View IAM policy
Run:
gcloud projects get-iam-policy PROJECT_ID
Replace PROJECT_ID with your project ID.
4.4 Add a role binding
Only if instructed, run:

gcloud projects add-iam-policy-binding PROJECT_ID \
--member="user:USER_EMAIL" \
--role="roles/storage.objectViewer"
This grants Storage Object Viewer role to the user at project scope. Replace
USER_EMAIL with the test email provided by your teacher.
4.5 Remove the role binding
Run:
gcloud projects remove-iam-policy-binding PROJECT_ID \
--member="user:USER_EMAIL" \
--role="roles/storage.objectViewer"
This removes the temporary role binding after the practical.
4.6 Create a service account
Run:
gcloud iam service-accounts create cloudnative-practical-sa \
--description="Service account for Practical 4 IAM lab" \
--display-name="cloudnative-practical-sa"
This creates an application identity. It does not automatically need broad
permissions.
4.7 Delete the service account
Run:
gcloud iam service-accounts delete \
cloudnative-practical-sa@PROJECT_ID.iam.gserviceaccount.com
Delete test service accounts after the lab to keep IAM clean.
5. OBSERVATION TABLE
Write your observations in this format:
Project ID:
IAM page opened:
Test principal email or group:
Role granted:
Was a basic role used?
Was the role predefined or custom?
Example permissions observed inside the role:
Was an IAM condition used?
Service account name:

Service account email:
Was a service account key created?
Was test user access removed?
Was the test service account deleted?
IAM Recommender or Policy Analyzer observed:
6. RESULT
A test principal was added to Google Cloud IAM with a limited predefined role.
Role permissions were reviewed, a service account was created and inspected, and
temporary access and test identities were removed after the practical.
7. CONCLUSION
This practical covered how Google Cloud IAM manages users, roles,
permissions, and service accounts. They also learned the importance of least
privilege, avoiding basic roles, using predefined roles, reviewing effective
access, avoiding unnecessary service account keys, and removing temporary access.
8. LATEST-PRACTICES REVIEW TEST
This review checks whether the practical follows current recommended Google
Cloud IAM practices.
1. Was the correct project selected before changing IAM?
Yes. IAM changes must be made only in the intended project.
2. Was a limited predefined role used?
Yes. A role such as Storage Object Viewer is better for this lab than Owner or
Editor.
3. Were basic roles avoided?
Yes. Basic roles such as Owner, Editor, and Viewer are broad and should be
avoided for normal production access.
4. Was least privilege followed?
Yes. The principal received only the access needed for the lab.
5. Was group-based access considered?
Yes. In real organizations, groups are usually easier to manage than assigning
roles directly to individual users.
6. Was the service account given limited or no role?
Yes. Service accounts should not receive broad roles unless absolutely required.

7. Were service account keys avoided?
Yes. Long-lived keys are sensitive and should be avoided when managed identity
options are available.
8. Was temporary access removed after the practical?
Yes. Temporary lab permissions should not remain after work is complete.
9. Was the test service account deleted?
Yes. Unused identities should be removed.
10. Were IAM Recommender or Policy Analyzer concepts reviewed?
Yes. These tools help audit access and move toward least privilege.
If the points above are covered, the practical aligns with current platform
practices.
IAM practices and introduces current access-management recommendations.
9. VIVA QUESTIONS
1. What is IAM?
2. What is a principal?
3. What is a role?
4. What is a permission?
5. What is an IAM allow policy?
6. What are basic roles?
7. What are predefined roles?
8. What are custom roles?
9. What is least privilege?
10. What is a service account?
11. Why should service account keys be avoided?
12. What is IAM Recommender?
13. What is Policy Analyzer?
14. Why should temporary access be removed?
10. SHORT ANSWERS FOR VIVA
1. IAM controls who can access Google Cloud resources and what they can do.
2. A principal is an identity such as a user, group, or service account.
3. A role is a collection of permissions.
4. A permission allows a specific action on a resource.
5. An IAM allow policy contains role bindings that grant roles to principals.
6. Basic roles are broad roles such as Owner, Editor, and Viewer.
7. Predefined roles are Google-managed roles for specific services.
8. Custom roles are user-defined roles with selected permissions.
9. Least privilege means granting only the permissions required for a task.
10. A service account is an identity used by applications or services.
11. Service account keys should be avoided because they are long-lived sensitive
credentials.
12. IAM Recommender suggests permission changes to reduce excessive access.
13. Policy Analyzer helps find who has what access to which resources.
14. Temporary access should be removed to reduce security risk.

11. COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID
1. Granting Owner or Editor for simple tasks.
2. Giving access in the wrong project.
3. Granting roles directly to many users instead of groups.
4. Forgetting to remove temporary access.
5. Giving service accounts broad permissions.
6. Creating service account keys unnecessarily.
7. Ignoring inherited permissions.
8. Not checking role details before granting.
9. Assuming one role binding is the user's only access.
10. Not reviewing IAM permissions regularly.
12. PRACTICAL COMPLETION CHECKLIST
Before submitting this practical, confirm:
1. You opened Google Cloud Console.
2. You selected the correct project.
3. You opened IAM and Admin.
4. You viewed the IAM page.
5. You observed existing principals and roles.
6. You identified basic roles.
7. You selected a limited predefined role.
8. You added a test principal if instructed.
9. You assigned Storage Object Viewer or another limited role.
10. You avoided Owner and Editor roles.
11. You verified the assigned role.
12. You reviewed role permissions.
13. You opened the Roles page.
14. You understood custom role purpose.
15. You opened Service Accounts.
16. You created a test service account.
17. You avoided unnecessary service account keys.
18. You removed test user access.
19. You deleted the test service account.
20. You reviewed IAM Recommender or Policy Analyzer concept.
21. You completed the latest-practices review test.
22. You answered the viva questions.

