PRACTICAL 5
CREATE DOCKER IMAGES AND CONTAINERS AND RUN CONTAINERIZED APPLICATIONS
Practical objective:
In this practical, you will create a simple application, write a Dockerfile, build
a Docker image, run a Docker container, test the containerized application, inspect
images and containers, stop/remove containers, and clean up Docker resources
safely.
Recommended platform used:
Google Cloud VM with Docker Engine installed.
Main tools used:
- Google Cloud Compute Engine VM
- Docker Engine on the VM
- Docker CLI
- SSH terminal
- Text editor such as nano or vim inside the VM
- Web browser only for opening Google Cloud Console
Estimated outcome:
By the end of this practical, you will be able to:
- Create or use a Google Cloud VM as a Docker lab machine.
- Install Docker Engine on the VM if it is not already installed.
- Explain Docker image and Docker container.
- Create a simple application.
- Create a Dockerfile.
- Create a .dockerignore file.
- Build a Docker image.
- Run a container from an image.
- Map host port to container port.
- View logs.
- Execute commands inside a container.
- Stop and remove containers.
- Remove images after the practical.
- Review Docker configuration using current container best practices.
Important safety message:
Docker containers are powerful. Do not run unknown images from untrusted sources.
Do not put passwords, API keys, private keys, or secrets inside Dockerfiles or
container images.
Lab environment recommendation:
For classroom labs, it is better to perform this practical on a cloud VM instead
of installing Docker Desktop on every local lab PC. You only need browser
access to Google Cloud Console and SSH access to the VM. This avoids software
installation permission issues on many computers and gives every student a
similar Linux-based Docker environment.
1. BASIC THEORY BEFORE STARTING
1.1 What is Docker?
Docker is a platform used to build, run, and manage containers.
Docker helps package an application with its dependencies so it can run
consistently on different systems.

Docker solves the common problem where an application works on one computer but
fails on another due to missing dependencies or different runtime versions.
1.2 What is a container?
A container is a lightweight isolated runtime environment that runs an
application and its dependencies.
1.3 What is a Docker image?
A Docker image is a read-only package used to create containers.
It may contain:
- Application code
- Runtime
- Libraries
- Configuration
- Startup command
1.4 What is a Dockerfile?
A Dockerfile is a text file containing instructions to build a Docker image.
Common instructions:
- FROM
- WORKDIR
- COPY
- RUN
- EXPOSE
- USER
- CMD
Docker reads the Dockerfile step by step and creates an image.
1.5 What is .dockerignore?
.dockerignore is a file that tells Docker which files and folders should not be
sent to the build context.
Examples:
- .git
- node_modules
- .env
- secret files
- temporary files
.dockerignore helps keep images cleaner and prevents accidentally sending
sensitive or unnecessary files into the build process.
1.6 What is port mapping?
Port mapping connects a port on the VM host to a port inside the container.
Example:
-p 8080:3000

Meaning:
- Host port 8080 maps to container port 3000.
Without port mapping, a web application running inside a container may not be
reachable from your browser.
1.7 What is a non-root container user?
By default, some containers may run as root. A safer practice is to run the
application as a non-root user inside the container.
Running as non-root reduces risk if an application is compromised.
2. REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Hardware requirements
- Computer or laptop for accessing Google Cloud Console
- Internet connection
2.2 Software requirements
- Web browser on the local machine
- Google Cloud VM running Debian or Ubuntu
- Docker Engine installed on the VM
- Text editor inside the VM such as nano or vim
Local alternative:
Docker Desktop on Windows or macOS can also be used, but for a college lab with
many PCs, the VM-based method is easier to manage because it avoids installing
Docker Desktop on every machine.
2.3 Knowledge requirements
- Basic command-line usage
- Basic understanding of ports
- Basic understanding of files and folders
In this practical, Docker commands should be run inside the Google Cloud VM SSH
terminal, not on the local lab PC, unless your teacher specifically chooses the
local Docker Desktop method.
3. STEP-BY-STEP PRACTICAL
STEP 1: Create or open a Google Cloud VM
Use the VM created in Practical 2, or create a small Debian/Ubuntu VM for this
Docker practical.
Recommended lab VM:
- Machine type: e2-small or e2-medium
- Operating system: Debian or Ubuntu
- Disk: 10 GB or more
- Firewall: Do not open extra ports unless required
The VM will act as your Docker lab computer. This means Docker does not need to
be installed on your local classroom PC.

Expected result:
A Linux VM is available and running.
STEP 2: Connect to the VM using SSH
Open the VM from Google Cloud Console and click:
SSH
All Docker commands in this practical should be typed inside this SSH terminal.
Expected result:
You are connected to the VM terminal.
STEP 3: Update package information on the VM
Run:
sudo apt update
This refreshes the package list before installing Docker Engine.
Expected result:
Package information is updated.
STEP 4: Install Docker Engine on the VM if needed
If Docker is not installed, install Docker Engine using Docker's official Debian
repository method.
Run these commands on a Debian VM:
sudo apt install -y ca-certificates curl
sudo install -m 0755 -d /etc/apt/keyrings
sudo curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/debian/gpg -o
/etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
sudo chmod a+r /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.sources <<EOF
Types: deb
URIs: https://download.docker.com/linux/debian
Suites: $(. /etc/os-release && echo "$VERSION_CODENAME")
Components: stable
Architectures: $(dpkg --print-architecture)
Signed-By: /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.asc
EOF
sudo apt update
sudo apt install -y docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin
docker-compose-plugin
This installs Docker Engine directly on the Linux VM. Using the official Docker
repository provides current Docker packages such as Docker Engine, CLI,
containerd, Buildx, and Compose plugin.

Expected result:
Docker Engine is installed on the VM.
STEP 5: Check Docker installation
Inside the VM SSH terminal, run:
docker --version
Expected result:
Docker version is displayed.
STEP 6: Check Docker is running
Run:
sudo docker info
Expected result:
Docker system information is displayed.
STEP 7: Optional permission setup for lab convenience
If your teacher allows running Docker without typing sudo every time, run:
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
Then exit and reconnect to SSH.
Adding your user to the docker group allows Docker commands without sudo, but it
also gives powerful control over Docker on the VM. Use it only on lab VMs where
your teacher allows it.
Expected result:
After reconnecting, Docker commands can run without sudo. If this step is not
done, use sudo before Docker commands.
STEP 8: Test Docker with hello-world
Run:
sudo docker run hello-world
This verifies that Docker can download and run a test container successfully.
Expected result:
Docker prints a hello-world success message.
STEP 9: Create a practical folder
Create a folder named:

cloudnative-docker-practical
Open this folder in your VM terminal:
mkdir cloudnative-docker-practical
cd cloudnative-docker-practical
Keeping all practical files in one folder makes the build context clear and easy
to clean up.
Expected result:
You are inside the practical folder.
STEP 10: Create package.json
Create a file named:
package.json
Add this content:
{
"name": "cloudnative-docker-practical",
"version": "1.0.0",
"description": "Simple Docker practical application",
"main": "server.js",
"scripts": {
"start": "node server.js"
},
"dependencies": {}
}
package.json describes a Node.js application and defines how to start it.
Expected result:
package.json is created.
STEP 11: Create server.js
Create a file named:
server.js
Add this content:
const http = require("http");
const port = process.env.PORT || 3000;
const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
res.writeHead(200, { "Content-Type": "text/plain" });
res.end("Hello from Cloud Native Docker Practical 5\n");
});
server.listen(port, () => {
console.log(`Server running on port ${port}`);
});

This is a very small web server. It listens on port 3000 and returns a simple
message in the browser.
Expected result:
server.js is created.
STEP 12: Create .dockerignore
Create a file named:
.dockerignore
Add this content:
.git
node_modules
npm-debug.log
.env
*.pem
*.key
Dockerfile
README.md
This file prevents unnecessary or sensitive files from being sent to Docker
during image build.
Expected result:
.dockerignore is created.
STEP 13: Create Dockerfile
Create a file named:
Dockerfile
Add this content:
FROM node:22-alpine
WORKDIR /app
COPY package.json ./
RUN npm install --omit=dev
COPY server.js ./
RUN addgroup -S appgroup && adduser -S appuser -G appgroup
USER appuser
EXPOSE 3000
CMD ["npm", "start"]
This Dockerfile uses a small Node.js Alpine base image, copies the application,

creates a non-root user, exposes port 3000, and starts the server.
Expected result:
Dockerfile is created.
STEP 14: Understand the Dockerfile instructions
Review each instruction:
FROM:
Selects the base image.
WORKDIR:
Sets working directory inside the image.
COPY:
Copies files into the image.
RUN:
Runs commands while building the image.
USER:
Runs the application as a non-root user.
EXPOSE:
Documents the port used by the container.
CMD:
Defines the default startup command.
Understanding each instruction helps you debug image build problems.
Expected result:
You can explain the purpose of each Dockerfile instruction.
STEP 15: Build the Docker image
Run:
sudo docker build -t cloudnative-practical-5:1.0 .
Expected result:
Docker image is built successfully.
STEP 16: List Docker images
Run:
sudo docker images
Expected result:
cloudnative-practical-5 with tag 1.0 appears in the image list.

STEP 17: Run the container
Run:
sudo docker run --name cloudnative-app -p 8080:3000 cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
Expected result:
The application starts and shows a message such as "Server running on port 3000"
in the terminal.
STEP 18: Test the application from inside the VM
Open another SSH terminal or stop the foreground container later and test in
detached mode. If the container is running in the current terminal, use a second
SSH session and run:
curl http://localhost:8080
Because the container is running on the VM, localhost means the VM itself. This
test does not require opening a public firewall port.
Expected result:
The terminal displays:
Hello from Cloud Native Docker Practical 5
STEP 19: Optional browser test from local machine
If your teacher specifically wants browser testing from the local PC, create a
temporary firewall rule that allows TCP port 8080 only from the required source
IP range. Then open:
http://VM_EXTERNAL_IP:8080
Do not open port 8080 to the whole internet unless your teacher instructs you.
Testing with curl inside the VM is safer for a beginner lab.
Expected result:
The browser displays the application message only if firewall access is allowed.
STEP 20: Stop the running container
In the terminal where the container is running, press:
Ctrl + C
This stops the running container process.
Expected result:
The container stops.
STEP 21: Run container in detached mode
Run:

sudo docker run -d --name cloudnative-app -p 8080:3000 cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
Detached mode runs the container in the background so your terminal remains
available.
Expected result:
Docker prints a container ID and returns control to the terminal.
STEP 22: List running containers
Run:
sudo docker ps
docker ps shows containers that are currently running.
Expected result:
cloudnative-app appears in the running container list.
STEP 23: View container logs
Run:
sudo docker logs cloudnative-app
Logs help you see application output and troubleshoot problems.
Expected result:
The server startup log appears.
STEP 24: Execute a command inside the container
Run:
sudo docker exec cloudnative-app node --version
docker exec runs a command inside a running container. This command checks the
Node.js version inside the container.
Expected result:
Node.js version is displayed.
STEP 25: Inspect container configuration
Run:
sudo docker inspect cloudnative-app
docker inspect shows detailed JSON information about the container, including
image, network, ports, mounts, and configuration.
Expected result:
Container configuration details are displayed.

STEP 26: Stop the detached container
Run:
sudo docker stop cloudnative-app
This stops the background container gracefully.
Expected result:
The container stops.
STEP 27: List all containers
Run:
sudo docker ps -a
Expected result:
cloudnative-app appears as a stopped container.
STEP 28: Remove the stopped container
Run:
sudo docker rm cloudnative-app
Stopped containers still exist on your system until you remove them.
Expected result:
The stopped container is removed.
STEP 29: Run container with automatic cleanup
Run:
sudo docker run --rm --name cloudnative-app-temp -p 8080:3000 cloudnativepractical-5:1.0
Use curl http://localhost:8080 from another SSH session to test.
Then press Ctrl + C.
The --rm flag removes the container automatically after it stops. This is useful
for temporary test containers.
Expected result:
The app runs and the container is removed automatically after stopping.
STEP 30: Tag the image with another tag
Run:
sudo docker tag cloudnative-practical-5:1.0 cloudnative-practical-5:latest

Tags are labels for image versions. For real production deployments, avoid
depending only on latest because it can change.
Expected result:
The image has both 1.0 and latest tags.
STEP 31: Check image history
Run:
sudo docker history cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
Image history shows layers created during the build. It helps you understand how
Dockerfile instructions become image layers.
Expected result:
Image layer history is displayed.
STEP 32: Optional image scan
If Docker Scout is available, run:
sudo docker scout quickview cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
or use another approved scanner such as Trivy if installed:
trivy image cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
Image scanning checks known vulnerabilities in images. In modern CI/CD pipelines,
image scanning is commonly automated.
Expected result:
Scanner output appears if the tool is installed.
STEP 33: Remove image tags
After completing the practical, run:
sudo docker rmi cloudnative-practical-5:latest
sudo docker rmi cloudnative-practical-5:1.0
Removing images frees disk space. Make sure no container is using the image
before removing it.
Expected result:
The image tags are removed.
STEP 34: Check Docker disk usage
Run:
sudo docker system df